

@node Appendix, , Glossary (Glossary), Top
@chapter Appendix

@menu
* Removed Language Features::	
@end menu

@node Removed Language Features,  , Appendix, Appendix
@section Removed Language Features

@c including appendix-removed

@menu
* Requirements for removed and deprecated features::  
* Removed Types::		
* Removed Operators::		
* Removed Argument Conventions::  
* Removed Variables::		
* Removed Reader Syntax::	
* Packages No Longer Required::	 
@end menu

@node Requirements for removed and deprecated features, Removed Types, Removed Language Features, Removed Language Features
@subsection Requirements for removed and deprecated features

For this standard,
    some features from the language described in @i{Common Lisp: The Language} have been removed,
and others have been deprecated (and will most likely not appear
in future @r{Common Lisp} standards).
Which features were removed and which were deprecated
was decided on a case-by-case basis by the X3J13 committee.

@i{Conforming implementations} that wish to retain any removed 
features for compatibility must assure that such compatibility 
does not interfere with the correct function of @i{conforming programs}.
For example, symbols corresponding to the names of removed functions
may not appear in the the @t{COMMON-LISP} @i{package}.
(Note, however, that this specification has been devised in such a way 
that there can be a package named @t{LISP} which can contain such symbols.)

@i{Conforming implementations} must implement all deprecated features.
For a list of deprecated features, see @ref{Deprecated Language Features}.

@node Removed Types, Removed Operators, Requirements for removed and deprecated features, Removed Language Features
@subsection Removed Types

The @i{type} @t{string-char}
@ICindex string-char
 was removed.

@node Removed Operators, Removed Argument Conventions, Removed Types, Removed Language Features
@subsection Removed Operators

The functions

@t{int-char}
@ICindex int-char
,
@t{char-bits}
@ICindex char-bits
,
@t{char-font}
@ICindex char-font
,
@t{make-char}
@ICindex make-char
,
@t{char-bit}
@ICindex char-bit
,
@t{set-char-bit}
@ICindex set-char-bit
,
@t{string-char-p}
@ICindex string-char-p
,

and
@t{commonp}
@ICindex commonp

were removed.

The @i{special operator} @t{compiler-let} was removed.

@node Removed Argument Conventions, Removed Variables, Removed Operators, Removed Language Features
@subsection Removed Argument Conventions

The @i{font} argument to @b{digit-char}
@IRindex digit-char
 was removed.
The @i{bits} and @i{font} arguments to @b{code-char}
@IRindex code-char

were removed.

@node Removed Variables, Removed Reader Syntax, Removed Argument Conventions, Removed Language Features
@subsection Removed Variables

The variables

@t{char-font-limit}
@ICindex char-font-limit
,
@t{char-bits-limit}
@ICindex char-bits-limit
,
@t{char-control-bit}
@ICindex char-control-bit
,
@t{char-meta-bit}
@ICindex char-meta-bit
,
@t{char-super-bit}
@ICindex char-super-bit
,
@t{char-hyper-bit}
@ICindex char-hyper-bit
,

and @t{*break-on-warnings*}
@ICindex *break-on-warnings*

were removed.

@node Removed Reader Syntax, Packages No Longer Required, Removed Variables, Removed Language Features
@subsection Removed Reader Syntax

The ``@t{#,}'' @i{reader macro} in @i{standard syntax} was removed.

@node Packages No Longer Required,  , Removed Reader Syntax, Removed Language Features
@subsection Packages No Longer Required

The @i{packages} 
     @t{LISP}
@IPindex lisp
,
     @t{USER}
@IPindex user
,
 and @t{SYSTEM}
@IPindex system

are no longer required.  It is valid for @i{packages} with one or more of these
names to be provided by a @i{conforming implementation} as extensions.

@c end of including appendix-removed

@c %**end of chapter

